There is no one-size-fits all treatment for Parkinson’s. Rather, treatment should be tailored to an individual’s symptoms via a shared decision-making process with your healthcare provider.

Treatment may include things that you do yourself, such as exercise, or things that you do with oversight, such as physical therapy, occupational therapy, and speech therapy or talk therapy. It may also include medications specific to your needs, such as medications aimed at improving your movement, and others aimed at improving non-movement symptoms such as constipation, urinary dysfunction, or sleep. The treatment of Parkinson’s is often best served via a team approach, with you – the person with PD – at the center and incorporation of your care partner, healthcare provider, therapists and other healthcare providers who treat specific symptoms of Parkinson’s.
Use Website In a Screen-Reader Mode
Accessibility Screen-Reader Guide, Feedback, and Issue Reporting
Skip to Content
↵
ENTER
Skip to Menu
↵
ENTER
Skip to Footer
↵
ENTER

Skip to main content
Call our Helpline: 1-800-4PD-INFO (473-4636)
Español
About Us
Blog
In Your Area

Search
Donate

Understanding Parkinson’s


Living with Parkinson’s


Resources & Support


Advancing Research


How You Can Help

Breadcrumb
Home
Living with Parkinson's
Treatment
Prescription Medications
IN THIS SECTION
Prescription Medications
View Menu
Levodopa
The most potent medication for Parkinson’s disease (PD) is levodopa. Its development in the late 1960s represents one of the most important breakthroughs in the history of medicine. Levodopa alone can produce nausea and vomiting, but when combined with carbidopa this side effect is significantly lessened if not eliminated. The well-known combined carbidopa-levodopa name brand formulation is called Sinemet®. Many patients and providers will use carbidopa-levodopa and Sinemet synonymously.
Dopamine Agonists
Dopamine agonists stimulate the parts of the brain influenced by dopamine. In effect, dopamine agonists trick the brain into thinking it is receiving the dopamine it needs. In general, dopamine agonists are not as potent as carbidopa-levodopa and may be less likely to cause dyskinesias.
Amantadine
Immediate-release amantadine has historically been used in Parkinson’s disease (PD) to help tremor. In recent years, amantadine has also been found to be useful for some in reducing dyskinesias (involuntary movements) that occur with dopamine medication. In 2017, an extended-release form of amantadine (Gocovri) was the first drug approved by the FDA specifically to treat dyskinesia in Parkinson's.
Adenosine A2A Antagonists
The basal ganglia — a brain circuit group that plays a role in Parkinson's disease (PD) symptoms — has adenosine A2A receptors located next to dopamine receptors, the target of many other Parkinson’s medications. Scientists have found that just as increasing dopamine in the basal ganglia can improve Parkinson’s symptoms, blocking the adenosine A2A receptor may have a similar effect. Since adenosine A2A blocking drugs (antagonists) do not act directly on dopamine receptors, they may be able to reduce “off” time (changes in the ability to move as a levodopa dose wanes) by 30 to 60 minutes per day without worsening dyskinesia. However, dyskinesia can still be a side effect. Reduction in “off” time should be seen by four weeks.


COMT Inhibitors
This class of Parkinson’s disease (PD) medications has little to no direct effect on symptoms but is used to prolong the effect of the Parkinson’s medication levodopa by blocking its break down. Catechol-O-methyl transferase (COMT) inhibitors are used primarily to help with “wearing off” — changes in the ability to move as the effect of levodopa becomes short-lived.

Anticholinergic Drugs
Anticholinergic medications reduce tremor by blocking acetylcholine, a brain chemical that influences movement. Anticholinergics can be helpful for tremor and may ease dystonia (painful cramping) associated with wearing-off or peak-dose effect, however, they have little effect on other symptoms of Parkinson's disease (PD).

Potential adverse effects include blurred vision, dry mouth, constipation and urinary retention.

Additionally, research from the Parkinson’s Foundation Parkinson’s Outcomes Project supports the finding that cognitive slowing is a side effect of anticholinergics. Older individuals are especially susceptible to confusion and hallucinations on anticholinergics, so these agents should be avoided in people older than 70.

MAO-B Inhibitors
Monoamine oxidase-B (MAO-B) is an enzyme in the body that breaks down several chemicals in the brain, including dopamine. An MAO-B inhibitor makes more dopamine available to the brain. This can modestly improve many PD movement symptoms.

MAO-B inhibitors may be useful as early monotherapy (a medication used alone) or as an add-on to other medications, including levodopa. When used with other medications, MAO-B inhibitors may reduce motor fluctuations — periods of diminished symptom control as a levodopa dose wanes — minimizing “off” time and extending “on” time.

Surgical Treatment Options
In the first few years of living with Parkinson’s, your doctor will most likely utilize medications to help manage your symptoms. Medications often help minimize motor fluctuations (changes in the ability to move, often related to medication timing; also called “on-off” fluctuations). However, there are occasions when medication is not enough and advanced treatment options are considered.

It is important to explore surgical options with your PD specialist if this is something you may consider. While surgery can be an effective treatment option for some PD symptoms, these tend to be the symptoms that previously improved while using levodopa. Surgery is often reserved for those who have optimized and exhausted medications for Parkinson’s tremor, or who experience profound motor fluctuations.

Currently, the two most common surgical treatments available for people living with PD are called deep brain stimulation (DBS) and Duopa™.
Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS)
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is a surgical therapy used to treat certain aspects of Parkinson’s disease (PD). This powerful therapy most addresses the movement symptoms of Parkinson’s and certain side effects caused by medications. DBS may also improve some non-motor symptoms, including sleep, pain, and urinary urgency. It is important to keep in mind that DBS can only help relieve symptoms, not cure or stop disease progression.

Duopa
Duopa™ therapy is a form of carbidopa-levodopa delivered directly into the intestine in gel form rather than a pill. It is used to treat the same movement symptoms of Parkinson’s disease (PD) that carbidopa-levodopa does, but is designed to improve absorption and reduce “off” times (changes in movement abilities as a levodopa dose wanes) by delivering the drug directly to the small intestine.

Before you can start Duopa, a surgery is necessary to make a small hole (called a "stoma") in your abdomen to place a tube in your intestine. A pump then delivers Duopa directly to your intestine through this tube.

Medical Marijuana
With medical marijuana now legalized in 38 states and the District of Columbia, there is strong interest in its therapeutic properties. Researchers are testing marijuana, which is also called cannabis, as a treatment for many illnesses and diseases, including Parkinson's disease (PD). However, despite this interest, there isn’t conclusive scientific evidence that marijuana is beneficial in PD.
PD-Related Medicinal Marijuana Trials
The use of cannabinoids has been suggested to help with managing neurological and non-neurological conditions. Literature on medical marijuana is incredibly varied. Studies have not clearly supported the use of marijuana for PD. The clinical studies of cannabis as a PD treatment that have been conducted are generally small studies that are predisposed to biases. Most of studies have not followed the clinical trial gold standard of a double blind, placebo-controlled trial design. Some studies had as few as five subjects.

While some results have been positive, the effects of medical marijuana are probably not completely understood. This is why more studies, especially those with more subjects, are needed.

Risks and Benefits for People with PD
There are risks and benefits associated with the use of cannabis for people with PD. Benefits include a possible improvement in anxiety, pain, sleep dysfunction, weight loss and nausea. Potential adverse effects include impaired cognition (specifically in executive function, or planning and judgement), dizziness, blurred vision, mood and behavioral changes, loss of balance and hallucinations. Chronic use of marijuana can increase the risk of mood disorders, particularly among young users, and lung cancer.

Physical, Occupational & Speech Therapies
When you live with Parkinson's disease (PD), symptoms can change as the disease progresses. Allied health professionals are medical experts from a variety of fields who can help manage your symptoms at every stage. Having an allied healthcare team is critical to living well with Parkinson’s, as they can help guide exercise, nutrition and medications.

Rehabilitation is defined as a set of treatments and therapies that can help people with Parkinson’s maintain or improve activities for daily living and independence. Rehabilitation professionals include physical and occupational therapists and speech-language pathologists skilled in PD who can keep you moving well, engaging in activities you love and communicating with the people in your life.
Rehabilitation & Parkinson’s
Research shows that rehabilitation can play a crucial role in prevention of injuries and help enhance quality of life. Most often, people with Parkinson’s are only referred to rehabilitation services when recovering from an injury, such as a fall. However, it is recommended that people with PD should begin rehabilitation at diagnosis and consistently every six to 12 months.

Rehabilitation therapies and exercise can:

Slow disease progression
Address movement symptoms
Improve daily functioning
Enhance mood and mental health
Despite mounting evidence, only 14% of people living with PD use speech, occupational or physical therapy as part of a treatment plan. Some medical centers and doctors’ offices incorporate rehabilitation and exercise into care regimens, but many do not.

Physical Therapy
A physical therapist is uniquely trained to design an exercise routine that targets specific motor impairments. Physical therapists also have an opportunity to provide frequent, direct feedback to help make you aware of how to exercise most effectively and safely.

A physical therapist can provide:

Education and self-management advice.
Exercise routines that have been associated with improvements (or slower declines) in mobility, quality of life and disease severity.
Answers to questions about the type, intensity, frequency or duration of exercise that is best for you.
Ways to maintain safety when exercising.
Help with:
Normal physical activity routine
Walking (slowness, small steps)
Freezing of gait (feeling glued to the floor or difficulty getting started)
Balance or stability
Posture
Pain
Moving around the house (getting up from a chair, moving around in bed)
Getting around (in/out of a car or bus, elevators, stairs and uneven ground)
Address fear of falling, fall prevention or worries about your safety.
Other health problems that affect mobility, including joint or muscle pain from arthritis, problems with endurance due to a heart or lung condition or a broken bone or surgery.

Physical therapists can be helpful at all stages of PD. Movement impairments in the early stages of the disease may not be obvious. By engaging a physical therapist with neurological specialization as part of their medical team, people with Parkinson’s disease can address bothersome symptoms and learn ways to prevent falls before they happen. Talk to your doctor about getting a baseline physical therapy evaluation and then continue with periodic re-evaluations.

According to the Parkinson’s Outcomes Project, the largest clinical study of Parkinson’s disease through our Global Care Network, increasing physical activity to at least 2.5 hours a week can slow decline in quality of life. The Parkinson’s Foundation has identified specific care approaches associated with better outcomes across people who seek expert care at our designated Centers of Excellence. Among others, best practices include early referral to physical therapy and encouragement of exercise as part of treatment.

Over the Counter & Complementary Therapies
Our understanding of Parkinson’s disease (PD) has evolved from the initial focus on motor symptoms to now include non-motor symptoms of the disease (such as mood, fatigue, constipation). People with PD who seek relief from their symptoms may decide to explore complementary therapies, which can support or complement traditional medicine. While there are many kinds of complementary medicine, this section focuses on herbs, vitamins and supplements.

Although there is little conclusive scientific information on natural supplements, researchers are examining several substances to evaluate their effectiveness on slowing PD progression and managing its symptoms.

Nutritional supplements are not regulated with the same approval method for prescription drugs. People with PD should discuss any medications (prescription or over the counter) with a doctor before taking them to avoid potentially dangerous interactions. If you are considering complementary medicine, we strongly urge you to investigate the credentials and experience of anyone offering advice or recommendations regarding such product.

Scientists have also examined Vitamin E, Vitamin C and health foods to evaluate oxidative properties. Vitamin E can fight damage in the brain caused by free radicals and has been suggested to lower the risk of PD. However, researchers conducted an extensive and thorough study more than 10 years ago (the DATATOP trial) and failed to find any evidence that Vitamin E slows the progression of PD or manages symptoms.

However, a recent study published in Neurology, revealed that those with high Vitamin E and C consumption might be associated to a lower risk of PD. Additional research is still needed to better understand this association. Vitamin E has few side effects, and many people with PD continue to take it in high doses of 400 IU or more.

Researchers are also examining if health foods, such as fermented papaya and blueberries, play a role in slowing nerve cell death. Scientists are optimistic about the research, but do not have conclusive data at this time to recommend these supplements to treat PD.

Creatine, another supplement of scientific interest, increases levels of phosphocreatine (an energy source in muscle and brain). The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) conducted a multicenter clinical trial to study creatine for treatment of early-stage Parkinson’s. The study was terminated early due to an interim analysis that did not reveal a significant different between creatine and a placebo.

Researchers have also studied a compound called glutathione to determine its effect on nerve cell metabolism and its power as an antioxidant. Glutathione has been shown to be safe in smaller studies, however many things remain unclear such as its effects on PD symptoms, what is the most effective administration method (oral, injection, vs intransal (nose spray), side effects and long-term dosing risks.

Free radicals are toxic molecules produced by virtually every cell in the body, usually in response to stress or injury. For example, sunlight exposure, cigarette smoking and infection can generate free radical formation in some cell types. These particles are thought to be particularly toxic to brain cells. Antioxidants “soak up” free radicals. Vitamins C and E are antioxidants that fight free radicals and may protect brain cells.

Some concerns have been raised about possible side effects of Vitamin E supplements, particularly the form of Vitamin E commonly available, alpha-tocopherol. A “mixed” supplement, containing multiple forms of Vitamin E may be safer or more effective.
Good dietary Vitamin E sources include whole grains, wheat germ, avocados, nuts and vegetable oils.
Since there is evidence that free radical damage is involved to some extent in PD, Vitamin E was investigated in a large study of people with early PD in the 1980s. The study did not show an effect on disease progression or neuroprotection. Instead, it showed that it could potentially be harmful to people with PD. It is possible that dietary Vitamin E is used more easily by the body than the supplements in the study, however more research is required.


Exercise
Exercise is an important part of healthy living for everyone. For those with Parkinson’s disease (PD), exercise is more than healthy — it is a vital component to maintaining balance, mobility and activities of daily living. Research shows that exercise and physical activity can not only maintain and improve mobility, flexibility and balance but also ease non-motor PD symptoms such as depression or constipation.

The Parkinson’s Outcomes Project shows that people with PD who start exercising earlier in their disease course for a minimum of 2.5 hours per week experience a slowed decline in quality of life compared to those who start later. Establishing early exercise habits is essential to overall disease management.
What type of exercise should I do?
To help manage the symptoms of PD, your exercise program should include these key components:

1.Aerobic Activity
2.Strength Training
3.Balance, Agility & Multitasking
4.Flexibility
The Parkinson's Foundation, in collaboration with the American College of Sports Medicine, created new Parkinson’s disease exercise recommendations to provide people with PD safe and effective exercise programs and instruction.

The exercise guidelines include recommended frequency, intensity, time, type, volume and progression of exercises that are safe and effective for people with PD. Each recommendation is paired with specific types of activity and special safety considerations for people with PD.
What kinds of exercise programs are available?
Many programs can help focus on improvements in functional capacity and mobility. These programs vary according to different aspects of physical training. Examples of PD exercise programs include:

Intensive sports training (non-contact boxing classes)
Treadmill training with body weight support
Resistance training
Aerobic exercise
Alternative forms of exercise (yoga)
Home-based exercise (YouTube videos or PD Health @ Home Fitness Fridays)
Stretching

Clinical Trials
There is a lot we still don’t know about health and Parkinson’s disease (PD). Different forms of medical research help us learn more. Types of medical research include:

Preclinical Studies
Before doctors can prescribe a treatment and before it can even be studied in humans, scientists must make sure it will not cause serious harm. To do this, they test the treatment in cells (in vitro) and in animals (in vivo). Preclinical studies provide detailed information on dosing and toxicity (if the treatment is harmful). Researchers look at these results to decide if the treatment is safe to be tested in people.

Clinical Studies
Scientists spend a great deal of time studying models of diseases in animals and cells. It is necessary to study how an intervention (a drug, device, therapy) works in people. Studies that involve people — human subjects — are called clinical studies. There are two main types of clinical studies: observational studies and clinical trials.

Observational Studies
Sometimes a scientist wants to understand more about how different aspects of people’s lives affect their disease. Areas of interest can include a person’s medications, age, gender and lifestyle choices, such as diet and exercise. In an observational study, scientists may ask participants to answer questions and have tests over time to study how different factors affect the participants’ disease.

For example, researchers could observe a group of people who have had PD for 20 years or more to understand the factors (age of disease onset, medications used, living situation, symptoms, etc.) that impact their long-term survival. Any insights gained can ultimately be used to improve health care delivery for this group.

Clinical Trials
Sometimes as a result of an observational study or from studying animals or cells in a preclinical trial, a scientist will develop a promising new treatment for a disease. This could be a drug, surgery or therapy like exercise or diet guidelines. To make sure it works, the scientist will conduct a clinical trial, also known as treatment research or an interventional trial. When a clinical trial is used to study a treatment or intervention, it is conducted in phases. The trials at each phase help scientists answer different questions such as

Is the intervention safe?
Does it work?
How well does it work?
Is it better than what we are doing currently?
Clinical trials that test drugs or interventions are conducted in a series of carefully monitored phases designed to answer specific questions.

Phase I trial: researchers test a new drug or treatment in people for the first time. A small group of people, typically fewer than 100, are monitored to evaluate the drug or treatment's safety, determine a safe dosage range, and identify side-effects.

Phase II trial: study the effectiveness of a drug or treatment in a larger group of people.

Phase III trial: the study drug or treatment is given to a large group of several hundred to several thousand people. This large-scale testing gives more detailed information about the drug's benefits, effectiveness, range of possible side effects, and compare it with standard treatment or placebo.

Phase IV trial: usually conducted on treatments that have already been Food and Drug Administration approved and is available to the general population. These trials help monitor the safety of the intervention in a larger population and obtain additional information about the benefits and use of the intervention.
All types of research are critical for improving care. Basic science research — tests done in a laboratory — can help us learn more about the human body and the causes of PD. Basic research can also point scientists in promising directions as they develop and refine treatments.

Clinical studies are essential because through them, discoveries made in the laboratory can help people with PD today and in the future. The Parkinson’s Foundation is at the forefront of PD research and clinical studies are central to our vision. The Foundation’s Parkinson’s Outcomes Project was the first study of its kind and continues to be the largest clinical study. Every year, insights from the study help optimize PD care, leading to better quality of life for people with PD today and better health for people with PD tomorrow.

Participating in a clinical trial can be a rewarding experience. Consider the following benefits:

You will have access to leading healthcare professionals, pioneering new treatments and high standards of care.
Joining a clinical trial can increase your knowledge and understanding of your disease.
People who take part in clinical trials are contributing to science that may benefit themselves and others. The medications that you take now are available only because people before you have volunteered in clinical trials.
Although every effort is made to ensure that clinical trials are safe as possible, clinical trials that test new therapies are experiments and can involve risks. Consider these risks:

There may be undesirable side effects to the treatment. A health professional will explain possible risks and side effects during the informed consent process.
The treatment may not be effective for the participant.
The study might have demanding time and travel requirements.
People with PD should also keep in mind that they may not receive the experimental treatment because they may be randomly assigned to the control group and receive either a different dose of the test treatment (a treatment that is already available and considered standard therapy for the disease, or a sugar pill known as a placebo). The control group is used as a basis for comparison. In many studies, the researcher is not aware of who is taking the treatment and who is in the control group.

These are issues you should address when talking to a clinical investigator.

Although there are general guidelines that doctors use to choose a treatment regimen, each person with Parkinson’s disease (PD) must be individually evaluated to determine which drug or combination of medications is best for them. For some, a “first choice” drug might be a form of levodopa, and for others, an initial prescription may be given for one of the dopamine agonists, an MAO inhibitor, or an anticholinergic.

The choice of medication depends on many variables including your symptoms, other existing health issues (and the medications being used to treat them) and age. Dosages vary greatly depending on a person’s needs and metabolism.

Since most Parkinson’s symptoms are caused by a lack of dopamine in the brain, many Parkinson’s drugs are aimed at either temporarily replenishing dopamine or mimicking the action of dopamine. These types of drugs are called dopaminergic medications. They generally help reduce muscle rigidity, improve speed and coordination of movement, and lessen tremor.

Always remember that medication is only part of the overall treatment plan for combatting PD. Talk to your doctor about available medications, but don’t forget exercise and complementary therapies.

Caution
Parkinson’s medications may have interactions with certain foods, other medications, vitamins, herbal supplements, over-the-counter cold pills and other remedies. Anyone taking a PD medication should talk to their doctor and pharmacist about potential drug interactions.

Generic vs. Branded Drugs
Currently, there are multiple pharmaceutical companies that manufacture a generic formulation of carbidopa-levodopa, dopamine agonists, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, and anticholinergics. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) requires that generic drugs show a similar risk and benefit to the branded drug prior to market approval, but in rare cases this standard is not high enough.

A review supported by the Parkinson’s Foundation reports evidence that if you are in more advanced stages of the disease, switching from branded drugs to generic, or from one generic to another, may have somewhat variable effects. The authors, including Parkinson’s Foundation National Medical Advisor Michael S. Okun, MD, believe that the standards for approving generic drugs for PD may not be strict enough to demonstrate that the generic alternatives are equally effective.

Work with your doctor to develop a tailored treatment plan. Using generic drugs will likely provide a cost savings. Infrequently, a person living with PD may require brand medication.

If you make the switch, follow these tips:

Report to your physician on the effectiveness of the drugs.
Carefully keep a diary of any side effects.
Record dose adjustments made by your physicians (higher or lower).
Try to stay with a single drug manufacturer for your generic medications. You may need to ask your pharmacist to special order for you.
When attempts to tailor drug therapy with a generic drug have been unsuccessful, have your doctor appeal to the insurance company for a branded drug. It is important to include details of the various adverse side effects with the generic medication in your appeal letter.

Resources for Prescription Assistance
NeedyMeds 
Offers information about assistance programs available to low-income patients and their advocates at no cost. Databases such as Patient Assistance Programs and Disease-Based Assistance, government programs, and other types of assistance programs are the crux of the free information we offer online.

RxAssist 
Offers a comprehensive database of pharmaceutical companies’ patient assistance programs that provide free medications to people who cannot afford to buy them. Also provides practical tools, news and articles to help health care professionals and patients find the information they need.

Partnership for Prescription Assistance Program 
Increases awareness of patient assistance programs and boosts enrollment of those who are eligible. Offers a single point of access to more than 475 public and private patient assistance programs, including more than 180 programs offered by pharmaceutical companies. Can be reached at 1-888-4PPA-NOW (1-888-477-2669).

Patient Access Network (PAN) Foundation 
Independent, national 501 (c)(3) organization dedicated to helping federally and commercially insured people living with life-threatening, chronic, and rare diseases with the out-of-pocket costs for their prescribed medications. PAN provides the underinsured population access to the healthcare treatments they need to best manage their conditions and focus on improving their quality of life.

Page reviewed by Dr. Chauncey Spears, Clinical Assistant Professor at the University of Michigan and Dr. Amelia Heston, Movement Disorder Fellow at the University of Michigan

Related Materials
 Books
Medications: A Treatment Guide to Parkinson’s Disease
Read Now
 Videos & Webinars
Expert Briefing: Medication: What’s New?
Watch Now
 Books
Managing PD Mid-Stride: A Treatment Guide to Parkinson's Disease
Read Now
Related Blog Posts
Couple buying medication in a store
 Raise Awareness
PD and Medication: What's New?
READ NOW 
giving medications to older man
 Advancing Research
PD and Medication: Advancing Treatment
READ NOW 
Pill boxes
 Advancing Research
Medical Cannabis Convening Findings: Top Takeaways and Guidance
READ NOW 
Order a Parkinson’s Hospital Safety Guide
The Hospital Safety Guide is a resource for people with Parkinson's and their care partners filled with useful tools and information to prepare for and navigate a hospital stay.